Research Statement

Since my appointment in 2010, I have carried out a research program in pharmaco-epidemiology with particular emphasis on cancer chemoprevention (the use of chemical agents to prevent or reverse carcinogenic progression to invasive cancer) and evaluating vaccine safety and effectiveness. The focus of this program has been on the use of epidemiological methods to identify and characterize effective pharmaceutical and biological (e.g., vaccine) prevention strategies against common diseases of public health importance, such as cancer and viral infections. 

I believe that this program is relevant to improving population health in Canada. Identification of effective chemopreventive agents can lead to the development of cost-effective strategies for cancer control. Research on the effectiveness and safety of drugs has been a strategic priority for CIHR (2009-2014 Strategic Plan). Similarly, research into vaccine effectiveness and safety is one of the goals of Canada’s National Immunization Strategy. Careful assessment of vaccine safety is essential for maintaining public trust in the immunization programs and for sustaining high vaccine coverage rates. Accurate estimates of vaccine effectiveness are necessary for immunization program planning and evaluation. My research program is also an excellent fit with the stated priority of the University of Manitoba’s Strategic Plan to strengthen innovations in public and population health, especially in the areas of infectious diseases and applied pharmaceutical sciences. 

Information provided by my research program has been regularly used in evaluating and planning vaccine programs in Manitoba and elsewhere. 
-	In the first study of its kind, we demonstrated that the HPV vaccine, in routine practice, is only 40% effective against high-grade cervical dysplasia and not effective at all among older women with history of dysplasia.1 As a result, a high-cost “catch up” vaccine program targeting these women in Manitoba was cancelled. 
-	Information from our sentinel physician surveillance network (the STRIVE project) was used to guide flu policy and messaging in Manitoba and was provided to the WHO to inform decisions regarding seasonal influenza vaccine composition.2-4
-	New syndromic surveillance methods, including use of emergency room data to monitor the spread and intensity of flu epidemics,5 have been integrated into routine practice by public health officials in Manitoba and included in the province’s weekly flu surveillance updates. 
-	My testimony to the National Advisory Committee on Immunizations (NACI) on the state of evidence for use of Fluad® (MF59-adjuvanted flu vaccine) in children was instrumental in NACI’s decision not to recommend this vaccine, and a systematic review we wrote on commission by the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) was included in NACI’s 2015 flu vaccine statement.
-	Our studies of the safety of flu and other vaccines (e.g., in relation to narcolepsy, encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis; see CV) have been used by several manufacturers to meet post-licensure regulatory commitments to Health Canada, FDA and European Medicine Agency. 
-	Our investigation of invasive pneumococcal disease outbreaks (septicemia and/or meningitis) in Winnipeg led to the identification of a new highly antibiotic-resistant strain of serotype (12F) of Streptococcus pneumonia which has since spread to other jurisdictions.6-8 Since then, various control measures, including a targeted immunization campaign with the polysaccharide pneumococcal vaccine, were implemented in Manitoba.
-	Our evaluations of the safety of several widely used drugs (e.g., selective serotonin uptake inhibitors, antipsychotics, statins and metformin, see CV) have been used by Health Canada and others to update patient safety guidelines.
